In his essay On Liberty
philosopher John Stuart Mill discussed the
importance of individuality.
Mill saw the free development of individuality
as one of the essential elements of human
well-being.
When we passively allow the world to run our
life
we’re reduced to mindless machines.
Our human capacities are withered and starved.
By not following our own natures
we’re left with no nature to follow.
In contrast, when we run our own life
we exercise and develop all our faculties
including our reason, our judgement, our self-control.
For Mill, individuality brings human beings
nearer to the best thing they can be.
He pointed out that no one’s idea of excellence
was to merely copy each other
and that the original insights that spring
from individuality
are a key driver in human innovation.
Mill said it was absurd to live as if nothing
had been learned
about the world before we came into it.
But we should feel free to critically assess
the traditions and customs we’re born into.
We’re not obliged to follow empty or outdated conventions
that have failed to anticipate our modern insights.
It’s no justification to continue practices
on the grounds they’ve always been done.
Justification requires evidence of ongoing
relevance.
For these and other reasons, Mill recognised
there was always a need for people to discover
new truths
and to inform us when old truths no longer hold.
And that need rested on the preservation of
individuality.
For Mill, whatever suppressed individuality
qualified as tyranny
whether it was done in the service of humans
or supposed supernatural entities.
Tyranny’s often conceptualised as the unconcealed exercise
of cruel, unreasonable and arbitrary power
and control.
We picture tyrants openly using menace and
intimidation
to pull us into orbit around them
coercing us to submit to their ideas.
But the people who subjugate us aren’t always
openly abusive.
Some inspire our genuine loyalty. Even love.
Some come in the guise of a hero, a champion,
a saviour;
someone who’ll rescue us, heal us,
enlighten us, affirm us.
We welcome them openly, unaware we’re taking
in a Trojan Horse.
As with the tyrant, we fall into orbit around
them
submitting to their ideas.
As with the tyrant, this subjugation does
all the same harm
suppressing our individuality;
stunting our development;
stifling our human capacities —
our reason, our judgement, our self-control;
and on the wider level
sabotaging human innovation and progress.
It’s this capacity to inspire wholehearted
allegiance
that makes subjugation by heroes the most
complex to tackle.
Believing them to be truly good
we become their dedicated defenders, their
devotees, their disciples.
We’re led by them. Moulded by them.
Often keen to draw others into subjugation
with us.
And suspicious and hostile towards individuals
who decline.
Obviously, to suggest all heroes are intrinsically
harmful would be asinine.
In his book ‘The Lucifer effect: understanding
how good people turn evil’
psychologist Philip Zimbardo gives a range
of examples
of genuinely helpful heroes
from whistle-blowers
to shelterers of persecuted groups;
from individuals ‘who organise their lives
around a humanitarian cause’
to the everyday heroes of the moment
who act decisively when called to service.
Clearly heroes exist across a spectrum from
helpful to harmful.
And the nature of the hero is a big factor
in whether we’ll find ourselves subjugated.
But arguably the biggest determinant
is the way we ourselves conceptualise heroes.
When we view heroes realistically as fallible
human beings
with accessible qualities, ideas and skills
we can appreciate them and learn from them
without diminishing ourselves.
So long as we maintain that practical perspective
any malignant heroes looking for a submissive
disciple to dominate
will be disappointed.
The problem starts when we view heroes as
something bigger;
when we elevate them above us
as something superior, infallible, magical;
when we idealise them
as something abstract, symbolic, pseudo-parental.
Then we turn them into fantasies
no longer subject to rational appraisal.
We imbue their ideas with false authority.
We imbue their actions with fake righteousness.
And they gain a new disciple.
We’re especially susceptible to magical
hero fantasies when we feel powerless.
When we experience tyranny, we might dream
of a champion
swooping in and rescuing us, propelled by
pure altruism.
If individuals turn up who seem to fit that
description
we’re not always quick to question
what we might be surrendering by accepting
their services.
With our guards lowered
we fail to notice we’re just swapping one
kind of subjugation for another.
We can see suppressive hero relationships
in religion, politics, business, therapy,
the family.
I want to explore some of the Faustian bargains
we misguidedly enter into.
In their paper ‘Changing the world and changing
the self’
Rothbaum and colleagues noted that submission
to powerful leaders, groups or gods
allows us to feel we’re joining in their power.
In particular, they cite the vicarious control
evident in religious phenomena.
For example, when we speak of gaining strength
through a god.
Of course, vicarious power is only reflected
power.
The moon has no light of its own.
It just reflects the sun’s light.
Without the sun, the moon would disappear.
Basking passively in the light of others
is not a means of acquiring our own.
But some folks who bask in the light of magical
heroes
come to mistake it for their own.
In Alexander Pope’s An essay on criticism
he cautions us not to succumb
to an inflated sense of our own abilities:
A little learning is a dangerous thing
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring
—a metaphorical source of knowledge —
There shallow draughts intoxicate the brain
And drinking largely sobers us again.
If we plot people’s confidence against their
knowledge
we sometimes find a premature peak
of inflated self-assurance right at the start.
Having gained a little learning, we overestimate
our proficiency.
When we submit uncritically to magical heroes
especially supposedly infallible divine ones
our conviction can swell to absolute certainty.
Our magical hero becomes our standard of truth.
Every truth that contradicts our hero
becomes a lie.
We show unshakeable faith
in what our heroes tell us.
And little understanding of it.
Magical heroes can keep us stuck
at the height of cocky ignorance for decades.
Many of us who fall into misguided discipleship
around them
go to our graves installed on that summit.
For those of us who do start to realise there’s
something wrong
we face a humbling nosedive into doubt and
despair.
This nosedive will be familiar to many folks
who’ve managed to let go of magical heroes.
I experienced it myself in my teens
when having been indoctrinated into Christianity
I realised I was no longer persuaded by its claims.
Having lived high in the clouds for years
one day I set out to find sound honest justifications
for my discipleship.
Reasons that could withstand any scrutiny.
Instead I discovered I was in a giant emotional
protection racket.
Many magical heroes run rackets
promising to protect individuals from some
harm.
This protection often turns out to be non-existent.
The magical heroes of Christian scripture
— a god character and a man claimed to be
his son —
were said to offer two kinds of protection.
One was protection from a realm of eternal torture.
A realm beyond death that couldn’t be verified.
The other protection was from hazards in this
earthly life
— disease, disaster, destitution.
To get this second type of protection
disciples had to plead for help from the magical
heroes by praying.
This second type would conceivably be open
to verification
except for the fact the outcome was completely
down to chance.
Disciples were told their prayers might or
might not be accepted.
We might or might not escape our abusive partner.
Our child might or might not die of cancer.
Comedian George Carlin famously said he stopped
praying to God
and started praying to the actor Joe Pesci.
And he noticed the prayers he offered God
and the ones offered Joe Pesci
were answered at about the same 50% rate.
Chance divine intervention
is indistinguishable from actual chance.
An unverifiable realm of torture
is indistinguishable from a scary story.
And a protection racket that fails
to demonstrate any protective function
is indistinguishable from a pure extortion
racket.
When our magical heroes
become the defining standard of truth and
morality
all kinds of concepts get corrupted.
Superficially, some of these corruptions might
seem positive.
But the effects are corrosive.
My former magical Christian heroes
were said to have executive power
to forgive all our transgressions against everyone.
But forgiveness has to come
from the people we hurt.
No one else can forgive us in their place.
A mother might forgive her son’s killer
for her own pain and loss.
But she can’t offer vicarious forgiveness
on her son’s behalf.
The idea of divine vicarious forgiveness
destroys the concepts of moral agency
and responsibility on which forgiveness rests.
It means we’re no longer answerable to the
people we wrong.
Their grievances with us can be erased by
a third party.
And the corruption goes deeper.
To receive this worthless vicarious forgiveness
we’re told we have to forgive others.
We have to forget about any apologies.
If we don’t forgive them, our magical heroes
won’t forgive us.
In this atmosphere of unearned forgiveness
many disciples predictably learn to take it
for granted.
In 2017, Amber DeBono and colleagues
saw this reflected
in three experiments where participants were led
to believe they were unsupervised.
Christians who were instructed to read and
write
about a forgiving god stole more money
and cheated more on a math test
than Christians who read and wrote
about a punishing god, a forgiving human
a punishing human or a neutral story.
DeBono and colleagues remarked:
‘It seems that feeling that God
has forgiven our own trespasses
may merely leave us feeling free
to trespass again.’
Obviously, to suggest all Christians
would steal or cheat like that is absurd.
Honest Christians wouldn’t dream of it.
But this finding will resonate with many Christians
and ex-Christians who’ve been repeatedly
mistreated
by fellow disciples who never apologise or
mend their ways.
Because every week at church there’s an
enforced amnesty
where everyone has to forgive everyone else.
Or suffer the consequences.
Automatic forgiveness is not the loving concept
it might seem on first glance.
It stunts our moral and social development.
For abusive disciples, it removes the incentive
to reflect on their behaviour, to take responsibility
and do better.
For targeted disciples, It breeds resentment
which they’re expected to just go on swallowing
to bursting point.
Forgiveness gained by proxy or inducement
is worthless emotional snake oil.
When we use these magical divine heroes as
role models
taking everything they say and do to be correct
we reproduce their chaos —
their virtues, their flaws
their wisdom, their stupidity
their charity, their abuse.
We mimic the good and the bad
without comprehending the difference.
We can also find ourselves mimicking behaviour
that has no moral component.
Within the mystical branch of Islam known
as Sufism
there’s a story of a disciple called Bayazid
Bustami
who refused to eat watermelon
because he didn’t know how Islam’s author
the magical hero Muhammad
cut and ate watermelons
and he didn’t want to do it the wrong way.
There are similar stories in Islam of a disciple
who would do a 360-degree turn on his camel
after mounting it
and a disciple who would kiss stones
for no other reason than that they’d observed
their magical hero doing it.
Replicating arbitrary gestures is the foundation
of superstition.
As humankind proceeds into uncharted areas
the gulf between our long-dead magical heroes
and our modern lives becomes ever wider.
Advancements in technology and medicine
— from in vitro fertilisation to interplanetary
colonisation —
raise new kinds of moral questions
for which our magical heroes’ dusty old
scriptures
offer no explicit guidance.
Would colonising other planets be a crime
in the eyes of an Abrahamic god character?
Maybe taking what was meant for other life
forms?
Without scriptural direction, we’re left
with limited options.
We could approach these issues like Bustami’s
watermelon
and refuse to participate in any unmentioned
activity.
Or we could try to find scriptural approximations
and make guesses.
The Governing Body of the Jehovah’s Witnesses
forbid blood transfusions based on Biblical
passages
that forbid the eating of blood
which has nothing to do with transfusions.
Or we can take the ‘try it and see what
happens’ approach
employed by the same JW Governing Body
in regard to genetically modified food.
In an April 2000 article in its magazine ‘Awake!’
it couldn’t decide whether or not this biotechnology
was equivalent to playing god.
The article concluded that if it was playing
god
the magical divine hero could step in and
reverse this development.
But what if he doesn’t step in?
Does that mean he approves?
Or what if he’s just silently observing
and condemning everyone associated
with genetically modified food for daring
to play god?
These immobilising questions bring home
the central plight of the disciple:
We can’t move past our magical heroes.
We’re confined by their limitations.
In order to move forward, we have to dethrone
them
and their bogus literature.
Pluck any novel from a shelf and odds are
we’ll find some wisdom,some insight.
Even cookery books often digress from recipes
into some half-baked personal philosophy from
the author.
It would actually be hard to write a book
totally devoid of merit even if we consciously
tried.
But just because a book’s got some good
ideas
we don’t abandon all judgement and slavishly
follow every word.
Even when books are marketed as a guide to
life
we still decide what parts we find useful.
If any.
Not so when we assign magical status to the
author.
Part of life development is about separating
things
we’ve mistakenly blurred together.
Like nudity and sex.
Blood-relatedness and a sense of obligation.
Often, we blur ideas and people.
We need to separate them.
Good ideas can come from any source.
Even tyrants occasionally express worthwhile
thoughts
I often start my videos with a quote.
Over the years people have criticised some
of their authors
citing some past transgression, minor or major.
They’ve criticised me for appealing to dubious
authorities.
But I’m not appealing to authority.
The quotes are about the idea, not the author.
The author is incidental.
Often many people will’ve converged on the
same thought.
Sometimes I’ll have significant disagreements
with the author.
The source doesn’t validate or negate the
idea.
The idea standsor fallson its own terms.
If authors have failed to uphold their own
stated values
we get an entertaining smack of irony.
Letting go of our magical heroes, divine or
otherwise
is often just about separating ideas from
people.
Amazing how the world changes
when that simple surgical act is performed.
Descending from the certainty of divine discipleship
can feel like crashing after long-term dependence
on a euphoric drug
one that’s often been injected into us from
infancy.
In the throes of cold turkey
we’re not always ready to see the upside
which is that moving past the magical hero
clears the path to knowledge.
With a bit of rigour and discernment
we can build sound foundations
enjoy more justified confidence and generate
our own light
instead of basking in the false light of magical
heroes.
Magical heroes aren’t exclusive to religion.
We might look for them in family, friends
teachers, partners, celebrities, politicians.
If we’re lucky, the people we try to cast
as our magical heroes will decline that role.
They’ll reject our unreal expectations
and weather our disappointment.
Every rejection of our magical fantasies
is an opportunity to give up our passive one-down
position
and fully embrace active independent development.
If we’re not so lucky, the people we grant
magical status will accept that status.
When two parties start feeding off each other
in a mutually gratifying one-up-one-down fantasy
that’s a tough bond to break.
Rational appeals are often useless.
If our respect and curiosity for truth is
powerful enough
we might be willing to listen to reason.
But if we’re more invested in comfort than
truth
— something a surprising number of people
cheerfully admit to —
we’ll dismiss the most reasonable voices
as misguided or even malicious.
Generally speaking, escaping a magical hero
fantasy
means a prison break from the inside.
Outside help might be offered.
But we have to want to escape our false heroes
ourselves.
Bruce has felt downtrodden his entire life.
It started with being beaten at home.
Later he was bullied at school.
In his teens, he’s befriended by a man in
a bar.
They talk about life and get to reflecting
on their grievances.
The man tells Bruce his binary philosophy
—
in life you’re either predator or prey.
You have to choose which one you are.
Bruce continues to meet up with his new friend
who introduces him to a like-minded network
offering him a replacement family
and a sense of belonging he’s never experienced.
Over time he’s plied with books and videos
targeting a specific social group as ‘the
enemy’ —
the reason the world is wrong.
Bruce’s anger is constantly stoked.
He’s encouraged to dwell on the times he’s
felt downtrodden
and challenged to do something about it.
Like a projectile
he’s filled with ideological fuel and fired
into society.
The power he feels in trampling others down
is intoxicating.
Bruce is the predator now.
And on a righteous mission.
His brutality escalates as he reaches for
more intense highs
from the violence and greater recognition
from his new family.
Eventually, Bruce begins to recruit new members.
Just like his recruiter
he won’t care what happens to these individuals.
He’s even stopped caring if he survives
himself.
Destroying the enemy is all that matters.
Bedelia has been a human punchbag
in her abusive family.
The only person who treated her
like a human was her uncle Tim.
At family events, he always acknowledged her
while other relatives demeaned and dismissed
her.
In her teens, when she was involved in a car
crash
he was the only member of the family to visit
her.
Just a fleeting visit, barely a minute long.
But to Bedelia, it catapulted him to magical
hero status.
In her 30s, Bedelia finally confides in Tim
about her abuse by the family.
He’s appalled —but not at them.
He dismisses Bedelia as a selfish child
and says he’s changed his whole opinion of her.
Betraying her confidence
he informs Bedelia’s family of her allegations
and empathises with their apparent bewilderment
and anguish.
For days Bedelia’s consumed by doubt and
self-recrimination
wondering how she can redeem herself in Tim’s
eyes.
To the starving individual, a crumb is a feast.
To an abused individual, a scrap of attention
can feel like a tidal wave of love.
In this distorted headspace
heroes are easily made from the thinnest material.
For Bruce, a random sense of belonging
was enough to cloud the fact his replacement family
were happy to destroy him for their cause.
For Bedelia, Tim seemed like a shining star
but only relative to the excessive darkness
of the rest of her family.
In reality he actually paid her very little
attention.
There was no special connection.
He was no hero.
In these real life cases
both Bruce and Bedelia came to realise
they were looking for family in the wrong
places.
Fortunately they would both find other people
who lived up to the word family;
who showed concern for their welfare
and a willingness to walk alongside them
even in the most difficult places.
Recovery wasn’t easy.
Bruce had to face crushing waves of guilt
for the violence he’d inflicted
and work through powerful suicidal urges.
Bedelia was shunned by her entire family including
Tim.
But the presence of authentic love in their
lives
showed them how deprived they’d previously
been
and expelled any fantasies of sliding back.
Targets of abuse are often starved
of examples of healthy supportive people.
But starving individuals must still learn
to avoid poisonous food.
Indigo engages Paul as her therapist.
She sees Paul as someone who’s figured life
out.
Her goal is to learn his magical insights
and apply them to her own life.
Although Paul tells her from the outset
he’s not there to offer advice
Indigo continues to ask for it.
And despite his intentions, Paul finds himself
giving it.
Their exchanges quickly fall into a pattern.
Indigo describes some problem
and insists she has no idea what to do.
Paul tries to spark her thinking with some
suggestions.
Instead of thinking, Indigo treats Paul’s
suggestions
as wise instructions which she resolves to
carry out.
As the weeks go by
Paul finds himself constantly exhausted after
their sessions
having done all the thinking.
Meanwhile Indigo, having done no thinking
has come to feel completely dependent on Paul.
Paul is a reluctant hero.
At the start, he fully intended to build
a strong therapeutic alliance with Indigo
working to address her problems together.
But he failed to pick up on her powerful expectations
of him.
He took her to be more independent
and self-sufficient than she was.
Until he tackles her expectations and allows
her
to experience healthy disappointment in him
he’ll remain glued to a throne he never
wanted.
This real life case illustrates how we can
be pushed
unwillingly into a hero fantasy by others.
Livia signs up for a course
run by a self-improvement guru
who offers participants enlightenment, fulfilment
and joy.
She attends three weeks of exhausting ten-hour
training days
which she’s led to believe will give her
valuable self-insight.
She’s told not to criticise the guru
or reveal any course content to outsiders
and given pseudo-philosophical justifications
for both these rules.
She’s constantly fed claims about the course’s
benefits
and repeatedly urged to sign up for further
courses
and get friends and family to do the same.
The sessions are sprinkled with pseudo-content
—
a mix of bumper-sticker truisms and impenetrable
esoterica.
Livia ends the three weeks none the wiser
and thousands of dollars poorer.
Future courses will repeat this pattern
bombarding participants with endless procedure,
jargon and self-promotion.
As Livia descends into serious debt
the single lesson she absorbs is:
‘buy more courses’.
When we invest in self improvement like therapy
or formal teaching
we sometimes expect the thinking to be done
for us.
We adopt a consumer mindset:
we’ve paid money, so we expect a product.
In fact our own thinking is the product.
Therapists, teachers, coaches are only there
to facilitate our thinking.
And for an effective outcome
we need some idea of what we want to achieve.
What specific areas we want to address.
What specific changes we hope to see.
Problems happen when we take a passive position;
when we formulate no goals
or goals too vague to quantify.
It’s like telling a cab driver ‘Oh just
take me somewhere.’
Our goals might even be magical.
Like perpetual happiness, freedom from self-doubt.
This is like telling the driver ‘Take me
to nirvana.’
Ethical drivers will decline our fare.
Magical hero drivers will happily take us
for a ride.
Lena doesn’t relate to the vast majority
of politicians.
Their backgrounds, social circles, lifestyles.
She longs to see someone like herself in power.
A maverick. A rebel.
In the elections, she votes for Bena
who markets herself as a woman of the people.
Bena has no political experience
and no special education or training in any
identifiable field.
But she speaks her mind and doesn’t bow
to anyone.
She won’t be told what to do.
To Lena’s joy, Bena wins the election.
Once in office, Bena begins dismantling the
institutions that restrain her.
She ends long-standing treaties with other
countries.
She abrogates the rights of social groups
she doesn’t like.
She disbands oversight committees and anti-corruption
departments.
In violation of her office, she exploits her
position
for personal gain through private businesses.
In further violation, she initiates military
force
to neutralise peaceful protesters.
Staff who advise against her reckless actions
are dismissed.
She won’t be told what to do.
When Lena’s friends condemn
Bena’s unprecedented abuse of power
Lena is genuinely baffled.
To her, Bena is a magical hero who’s shaking
things up.
A maverick, a rebel. Just like Lena.
She must be good.
Sometimes we see some reflection of ourselves
in a magical hero.
Sometimes it’s just a single trait —one
we strongly identify with.
It then becomes easy to project all our other
qualities onto them.
We create a vicarious fantasy that’s hard
to separate ourselves from.
Their success becomes our success.
And we make the same excuses and rationalisations
for their failures and abuses that we’d
make for our own.
For John Stuart Mill, there were very few
conceivable justifications
for the existence of any governing power.
One of them was to protect the freedoms of
the people it governed.
Not the freedoms of some,
but the freedoms of all.
Government was a form of practical service.
And the power it wielded meant it needed to
be held
to the highest standards of accountability
to guard against corruption.
But when we view our leaders as magical heroes
we often hold them to the lowest standards
of accountability
because we’ve built our dreams on them.
We ignore their corruptionor excuse it as
a necessary evil
in contrast to the unnecessary evil of other
people’s leaders.
Magical heroes come in many forms —
family, teachers, leaders, gods.
When we stop looking to them to fulfil our
dreams for us
and take an active role in achieving them
ourselves
the impulse to defend their corruption fades.
And we can acknowledge fraud, incompetence
and negligence wherever we see it.
It’s worth mentioning one last kind
of discipleship many of us fall into.
One where there’s no tangible hero.
But a system of rewards that draws us in
disrupts our thinking, stifles our development
and consumes substantial volumes of our lives.
As far back as 1950, mathematician Norbert
Wiener
was reflecting on the idea of machines
that could collect information from human
beings
to determine the most probable development
of a situation.
He noted how such machines could be used by
other humans
to increase their control over the human race.
But he concluded this technology was unlikely
to be realised
because, with humans being so complex
the volume of data required would be impossibly
vast.
Fast forward to 2017 where, in an interview
with Axios’s Mike Allen
Sean Parker, former Facebook president
reflects on the challenge he and his fellow
Facebook leaders once set themselves:
how could they consume as much
of our time and conscious attention as possible?
They decided they should give users
a little dopamine hit every once in a while
because someone liked or commented on a post.
They constructed a social validation feedback
loop
with users responding to their responders
and so on, back and forth.
Parker said this was exactly the kind of thing
a hacker like himself would come up with
because it exploited a vulnerability in human
psychology.
He said the inventors and creators consciously
understood
what they were doingand did it anyway.
Constantly having our attention disrupted
isn’t great.
Aside from fragmenting our thinking
the intermittent nature of these positive
dopamine hits
can make them extremely addictive.
The user is kept in a state of uncertain anticipation
waiting for a hit that may or may not come.
Some creators agonise over what kind of post
will get a bigger response.
Social media companies offer them endless tips
to maximise audience engagement.
Following these formulaic tips
creators slowly lose their own voice
and become generic photocopies.
But these are just the upfront methods of
moulding us.
The larger threat to individuality
comes from the more insidious data-gathering
side.
Every time we respond to a notification
information’s gathered about what kinds
of material engage us.
Platform software constructs an evermore complex
picture of us.
And discovers how to extract more attention
from us.
Our addiction is constantly tweaked by a drug
that’s constantly learning how to increase
our habit.
We become a slave to the algorithm.
Computer scientist Jaron Lanier cautions social
media users
about the relentless, robotic, ultimately
meaningless
behaviour modification they’re subjected
to
in the service of uncaring algorithms —
algorithms programmed to target us
not with good or reliable information
but simply with what most reliably grabs us.
Unfortunately sensationalistic misinformation
is often far more successful at that.
Our online feeds and recommendations
can quickly funnel us into echo chambers
in which unqualified opinion is magnified
over facts
with little exposure to differing viewpoints.
Much like Bruce’s case, many people have
spoken about
how either they or their friends or family
became radicalised into some ideology
by being drawn down a rabbit hole of recommendations.
When this happens on a global scale
it can lead to unprecedented levels of tribalism.
When we encounter disagreement we think:
How can they be so unaware?
And they think exactly the same about us.
We can avoid becoming echo chamber drones
by exposing ourselves to a wide variety of
sources
including sources that conflict with our own.
With firsthand information, we can form our
own judgement
instead of relying exclusively on secondhand
opinion.
We can switch off notifications, either selectively
or completely.
Instead of fitting into their chaotic schedule
we can make them fit into ours
and experience the wonderful freedom
and clarity of uninterrupted thought.
The idiom ‘Fire is a good servant but a
bad master’
applies to many things in life
including social media.
In its place, it can educate
break down barriers and unite people.
When it’s allowed to run wild
it can miseducate, build barriers and divide
people.
Keeping it in its place is the challenge.
For all of us.
We often submit to false heroes in the most
desperate times
precisely because they seem to offer some
escape.
Which is why it’s during those times
that we should be most vigilant
when heroic figures appear offering salvation.
Before accepting their services
we need to think carefully about what we might
be surrendering.
If the gift horse we’re being offered is
a Trojan one
we’ll be glad we looked it in the mouth.
Submitting to magical heroes
might sometimes elevate us emotionally
but it diminishes us developmentally.
As Rothbaum and colleagues point out
it can lead to a self-perpetuating cycle of
greater dependence
increased fear of powerlessness,
increased conformity
even greater dependence and so on.
Submitting to tyrants or heroes can have the
same damaging effects.
To achieve individual freedom, we can be no
one’s slave.
And no one’s disciple.